---
title: "Getting and Cleaning Data Project Code Book"
output: html_document
---


## Study Design

The purpose of this project was to produce a tidy summation dataset from the data generated by "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones" experiment (HARUS). The basis of the HARUS experiment was to collect data from the accelerometers of a Samsung Galaxy S smartphone while being worn by a group of 30 volunteers in the act of performing six physical activities.

The tidy summation dataset produced by this project, "tidy_dataset_ave.txt", is the average of the mean and standard deviation variables accross the test and train measurements of the HARUS experiement. The R Script, run_analysis.R, is the method that is used to produce the tidy summation dataset.


The following snippet from the R script "run_analysis.R" generates the final summation dataset:

```{r}
tidy_dataset_ave <- ddply(tidy_dataset,.(subject_id, activity_name), colwise(ave, features_std_mean))
tidy_dataset_ave <- unique(dataset_ave)
```


## Code Book

The selected set of variables in the summary dataset is a subset of the variables found in the HARUS experiement dataset. This subset of variables include the mean and standard deviation feature variables from the HARUS experiement dataset. Although the variable names were cleaned up for clarity and to make them valid R data frame column names.

The following snippet from the R script "run_analysis.R" creates the clean variable names:
```{r}
features_clean <- gsub("[\\(\\),-]", "", features$feature_name)
```

### Variable Units
*(As Described by the HARUS experiement documentation)*

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

### Complete List of Variables

* tBodyAccmeanX
* tBodyAccmeanY
* tBodyAccmeanZ
* tBodyAccstdX
* tBodyAccstdY
* tBodyAccstdZ
* tGravityAccmeanX
* tGravityAccmeanY
* tGravityAccmeanZ
* tGravityAccstdX
* tGravityAccstdY
* tGravityAccstdZ
* tBodyAccJerkmeanX
* tBodyAccJerkmeanY
* tBodyAccJerkmeanZ
* tBodyAccJerkstdX
* tBodyAccJerkstdY
* tBodyAccJerkstdZ
* tBodyGyromeanX
* tBodyGyromeanY
* tBodyGyromeanZ
* tBodyGyrostdX
* tBodyGyrostdY
* tBodyGyrostdZ
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanX
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanY
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanZ
* tBodyGyroJerkstdX
* tBodyGyroJerkstdY
* tBodyGyroJerkstdZ
* tBodyAccMagmean
* tBodyAccMagstd
* tGravityAccMagmean
* tGravityAccMagstd
* tBodyAccJerkMagmean
* tBodyAccJerkMagstd
* tBodyGyroMagmean
* tBodyGyroMagstd
* tBodyGyroJerkMagmean
* tBodyGyroJerkMagstd
* fBodyAccmeanX
* fBodyAccmeanY
* fBodyAccmeanZ
* fBodyAccstdX
* fBodyAccstdY
* fBodyAccstdZ
* fBodyAccmeanFreqX
* fBodyAccmeanFreqY
* fBodyAccmeanFreqZ
* fBodyAccJerkmeanX
* fBodyAccJerkmeanY
* fBodyAccJerkmeanZ
* fBodyAccJerkstdX
* fBodyAccJerkstdY
* fBodyAccJerkstdZ
* fBodyAccJerkmeanFreqX
* fBodyAccJerkmeanFreqY
* fBodyAccJerkmeanFreqZ
* fBodyGyromeanX
* fBodyGyromeanY
* fBodyGyromeanZ
* fBodyGyrostdX
* fBodyGyrostdY
* fBodyGyrostdZ
* fBodyGyromeanFreqX
* fBodyGyromeanFreqY
* fBodyGyromeanFreqZ
* fBodyAccMagmean
* fBodyAccMagstd
* fBodyAccMagmeanFreq
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagmean
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagstd
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagmeanFreq
* fBodyBodyGyroMagmean
* fBodyBodyGyroMagstd
* fBodyBodyGyroMagmeanFreq
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagmean
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagstd
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagmeanFreq


## References

==================================================================

Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset
Version 1.0

==================================================================

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova.
Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
www.smartlab.ws

==================================================================

